# Orchard Crops

**Citrus Huanglongbing (HLB)**

Modelling the spread and mitigation of an emerging vector-borne pathogen: citrus greening in the U.S.

Citrus are one of the most popular classes of fruits with an estimated 75 million metric tons consumed globally each
year. One of the most serious threats to citrus production world-wide is citrus greening (Huanglongbing disease), which
is transmitted by the Asian citrus psyllid (Diaphorina citri), a small invasive insect that feeds and lays eggs on the
developing flush shoots in citrus.

Trying to slow or halt the rapid spread of this devastating disease and it’s vector has been challenging in the main
growing regions in the U.S. Team members teamed up with the Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service, USDA, to develop
a new flexible model to address the expanding distribution of citrus greening across southern states of north America.
They used surveillance data from Texas to predict risk in main growing regions across the state of California.
Transferable models are vital to support famer’s decision-making between crop protection options, as well as shaping
regulatory and operational policies for emerging large-scale outbreaks in new citrus-growing regions.

<img src="../../images/hlb.png" width="500"/>

**Figure above shows distribution maps predicting the potential spread of both insect vector (Asian citrus psyllid) and
Huanglongbing disease (citrus greening) moving across the Central Valley, up to 2030. These assumptions are made using
transferable parameters from Texas and adjusting for climatic conditions in the Central Valley region.**

[Nguyen V-A, Bartels DW, Gilligan CA (2023) Modelling the spread and mitigation of an emerging vector-borne pathogen: Citrus greening in the U.S. PLoS Comput. Biol. 19(6): e1010156](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1010156) 

**Project members**

- Viet Nguyen
- Rich Stutt
- Professor Chris Gilligan 

**Avocado Sunblotch Viroid** 

**Survey protocol for avocado sunblotch viroid in commercial orchards to demonstrate pest freedom**

Equitable access to markets is an integral component of global food security. For many farmers and producers,
particularly in low-income countries demonstrating that crops adhere to international plant health regulations can be
resource-heavy and hinder their entry to the more profitable trading routes.

<img src="../../images/avocado.png" width="300"/>

The task of undertaking extensive surveys and testing for presence of Avocado SunBlotch viroid (ASBVd) in orchards has
the potential to be significantly reduced for avocado producers after a study carried out by members of the team and
their international partners. The team developed a flexible protocol to calculate the optimal sampling size required to
establish the presence or absence of the pathogen in orchards that would satisfy the constraints set by a regulatory
authority. To demonstrate the effectiveness of the model more broadly, the team developed a user-friendly software
application, providing the basis for extending the application to a wider range of economically important plant
pathogens which prevent farmers with limited resources entering international supply chains.

[Bonnéry D.B., Pretorius L.S., Jooste A.E.C., Geering A.D.W., Gilligan C.A. (2023) PLOS ONE 18(4): e0277725.](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0277725) 

**Project members**

- Daniel Bonnery
- Chris Gilligan

**Partners**

- Centre for Horticultural Science, Queensland Alliance for Agriculture and Food Innovation, University of Queensland, Australia
- Agricultural Research Council-Tropical and Subtropical Crops, Mbombela, South Africa 

# Stored Foods

**Predicting hidden toxins in vital food supply chains**

Maize is a primary income source and an important component for nutrition in the diets of many people in countries
across Sub-Saharan Africa, Latin America, and Asia. Food production in several of these regions is already under
increasing pressure and is predicted to further decline under conditions brought about by climate change. This is
significant because the optimal conditions for the growth of the saprotrophic fungi that produce aflatoxins are
associated with increased temperature and humidity. While high-income countries are able to rely on high tech solutions
for reducing levels of contamination during growing, storing and transporting cereal crops, those that are less
well-resourced require reliable, cost-effective methods of reducing the risk to food supplies.

<img src="../../images/maize.jpg" alt="maize" width="300"/>

Despite the awareness of the dangers of contaminated maize entering the food supply chain, and models that can
accurately predict levels of Aspergillus and aflatoxin in the field, numerous cases of aflatoxin contamination at the
factory gate are commonly reported. Where most risk prediction models have focused on the pre-harvest dynamics of A.
flavus growth and aflatoxin production, the team’s integrated epidemiological modelling framework enables coverage of
the entire supply chain from planting to delivery, and allows for predicting the costs and benefits of various aflatoxin
mitigation interventions.

[Richard O.J.H. Stutt, Matthew D. Castle, Peter Markwell, Robert Baker, Christopher A. Gilligan. An integrated model for
pre- and post-harvest aflatoxin contamination in maize. npj Sci Food 7, 60 (
2023).](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41538-023-00238-7)

**Project members**

- Richard Stutt
- Chris Gilligan 

# Forestry and Urban Trees

**UK Plant Health: Epidemic threats to UK forest, farmland and urban trees**

The UK Government’s England Tree Action Plan (2021-2024) estimates that trees in our landscapes provide economic,
cultural and social ecosystem services in the region of £4.9 billion per year, with a total asset value of £175 bn.
Increased trade and climate warming have enabled new introductions from continental Europe to establish and spread into
the UK. Oak Processionary Moth, Sweet Chestnut Blight and the larger eight-toothed European spruce bark beetle are
amongst recent introductions which, if not controlled, could have a devastating impact on forestry and tree landscapes.
Ash die-back, now wide-spread in the UK, threatens to destroy over 80% of the 185 million ash trees. The arrival of a
beetle the Emerald Ash Borer, which has destroyed large areas of trees across USA and European Russia, could result in
an even greater decline of native Ash in UK. To address these issues the team at Cambridge built an epidemiological
toolkit that helps policymakers predict the status and future spread of tree diseases. Their models have been used to
inform ministerial decisions on strategies such as the imposition of an import bans to reduce the risk of new
introductions, surveillance strategies to support outbreak management and evaluation of potential control strategies to
optimise the use of limited resources.

Predicting threats to food security (cam.ac.uk)
<https://doi.org/10.1002/ppp3.10195>
<https://doi.org/10.1111/afe.12468>
<https://www.plantsci.cam.ac.uk/research/groups/epidemiology-and-modelling>

**Project members**

- Christopher Gilligan
- Cerian Webb
- Richard Stutt
- Yevhen Suprunenko

<img src="../../images/urban_park.jpg" alt="park" width="600"/>

Avenues of trees of a single species are a striking feature in many towns and cities across England and Wales. These
magnificent landscape features are frequently threatened by the arrival of invasive pests and pathogens which in the
case of Dutch Elm Disease, saw the devastating loss of a single species from urbanised areas, within a decade.

This project examined how human activity and tree distribution across private and publicly owned land might affect the
rate and direction of spread of invasive pests and pathogens.

![](../../images/defra.png)

![](../../images/tree_pests.png)

The modelling results have important implications for the development of strategies to manage and control outbreaks,
highlighting the need not only to consider distance from infested trees but also how connected trees are via road and
rail networks. The study also demonstrates the need for effective pest biosecurity measures at international ports and
transportation hubs and to consider the potential impact of species composition and distribution in an epidemiological
context when planning future planting initiatives.

[emerald ash borer](https://doi.org/10.1002/ppp3.10195)<br><br>
[oak processionary moth](https://doi.org/10.1111/afe.12468)<br><br>
[Webb, C.R., Avramidis, E., Castle, M.D., Stutt, R.O.H., Gilligan, C.A. 2023. Modelling the spread of tree pests and pathogens in urban forests. Urban Forestry & Urban Greening, 86, 128036](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ufug.2023.128036)
